Is the romantic archetype of the great artist finished? And if so, what is replacing it?
No, I don't think it is finished. I think there are still absolutely great artists who produce
work that's on a level with which only a small few others produce anything comparable.
And I think you can find hierarchies of artistic production in most
cultures in the world and in most periods in history. Whether the particular archetype
that was promoted by the romantics and the idea of the somewhat aloof artist and the
artist as a seer of special truths not really available to anyone else. Whether that has the
same currency today as it might have had in the early 90s century, I'm less sure. But I still think
there are absolutely great artists and I still think it's important that art forms a type of
activity which interacts with a wider society but doesn't just simply mirror it or isn't simply
determined with it by it. So I do believe in art existing in a dialectical relationship with the
rest of society and culture. And I do distinguish the words art and culture and that's even allowing
for multiple different meanings of the term culture itself. Right. Well, there are those who would
say that the very idea of the great artist is something that should be called into question
in the sense that it seems to indicate what would you say, well, a hierarchy to begin with,
a hierarchy of competence or of importance that some would call into question. They would instead
espouse perhaps a more flat horizon, a more flat landscape in which everybody potentially can
contribute as opposed to the, I'm caricaturing this perhaps, but the great man archetype of
people like Stravinsky, T.S. Eliot, Kandinsky, Schoenberg and so on.
Well, I'd ask if they would extend that anti-hierarchical view into popular culture, say. I mean,
would they say that the reason why Taylor Swift or Beyoncé are such global superstars compared
to many others that only a small community ever heard of, is that entirely arbitrary?
Is that not something to do with how they sing, how they dance, how they perform, the things that
they do sing or whatever? I mean, this is putting whatever views I might have about either of those
artists to one side, but I don't really believe anyone truly thinks that there are no distinctions
and no hierarchies between different types of artists in whatever form. And, you know, if it's
just down to a simpler thing as a conversation between two people who've been watching something
on television the previous evening, they'll often talk about what they thought of it,
how good it was. One might think it's better than the other does. You're already setting up a hierarchy
in that very process. Value judgment, I think, is a very common and perhaps even intrinsic human
activity when confronted with art, confronted with culture. And it's only perhaps a small few
academics, including semester musicologists and anthropologists, who seem to think you can
totally bracket out value judgment or is it somehow, it's some great sin. I don't think so.
I think it goes on all the time. And the moment you have value judgments about any culture,
then you create hierarchies between those who produce it.
Okay. I want to stay on this question of artistic greatness, of the great artist for a moment,
because this is very much on my mind at present. First of all, how would you define a great artist
in the present day context? What would that sort of a figure do and what would their role be within
society? Right. Well, those are two quite different questions, I think. I mean, very simply,
I'd say a great artist is one who produces a lot of great art, but I realize that doesn't
really answer the question then what constitutes great art. And I'm not sure if I can really
answer that question in any sort of comprehensive way. I can believe that such a thing like great
art does exist. But why exactly it's great and it's so much greater than a lot of other things
is often quite a complex question and needs to be addressed in each individual case.
If you could say this is what makes great art, that almost suggests that there's a
formula for producing it, which I don't believe there is.
Well, I think to start with, just to unravel this a little bit, the greatness of the art
does not reside only in the art itself. So it has something to do with the way the
art or indeed the artist interfaces with their society. And the greatness has something to do
with magnitude, to use a word that is perhaps not ideal, but the impact that the artist may be
having or may not be having. If the work is great but exists in a drawer and is not doing
anything real in the world besides merely existing, then can we ascribe greatness to that?
Well, last year I went to see the Vermeer exhibition that was on in Amsterdam, which is
absolutely incredible, probably the greatest art exhibition I've ever seen. Now I know that
Vermeer's paintings languished relatively unknown for quite an extended period until
they were rediscovered. I think it was some point in the 19th century.
Now they didn't have the impact that they have now in the earlier times, and they didn't have
a critical scholarly apparatus that developed around them, and which I do believe conditions
to some extent the reception of art, and I don't mean that in a negative way.
But I don't see any necessary reason why if they hadn't had that in earlier times,
they wouldn't have been thought just as great then. So what I'm trying to say from that is,
I don't think the reasons we think Vermeer is great now are limited to our current temporal
moment. I think it's something much more intrinsic in the art, which gives the potential for a
particular level of impact. But I don't think that is something grafted on artificially. I think
that has to somehow come out of the intrinsic qualities of the art itself, which to me is sort
of self-evidently monumental in Vermeer's case. So I'm just trying to remember the rest of your
question. Well, would there be... Is it more difficult to make a claim for greatness if the
artist is addressing perhaps an extraordinarily restricted audience, or perhaps even no one at
all, as opposed to... The Vermeer case is interesting because you could certainly put forth the argument
that Vermeer is addressing very simple universal concepts in his work that speak to a large number
of people. If we get into modernism and wherever it is we are now, you get into an archetype of
an artist that is extraordinarily, in many instances, detached from the reality of the
society in which they're living. And perhaps even dealing with artistic aesthetic concepts that are
so esoteric by their very nature that such universality, though it may be buried in there
somewhere, is going to be extraordinarily difficult for most people to locate.
I'll take two of the examples that you suggested before, Stravinsky and T.S. Eliot.
The means that they were using for conveying their art might have been, to some extent,
esoteric at the time, perhaps more so in Eliot's case than at least the early Stravinsky,
but I think they were dealing with concerns that were extremely
urgent at the time. In the early Stravinsky dealing with issues of primitivism, of folklorism,
with stylized barbarism and so on, which, for the works he was writing at the beginning of the
1910s, they now look incredibly prescient, I think, in knowledge of what happened in the
succeeding decades. In the case of Eliot, I mean, he was engaging with popular culture,
with sort of popular song and ballads and things like that, and looking at the modern city and the
whole alienation that came with that, and looking at the state of religion in his own time. These
were not very simply private concerns to Eliot himself. The way he assembled these into his
montage, like works of quite heavily, I would say, inspired by sort of Baudelaire's view of the city
as well, might have been part of a technical approach that was at that stage relatively
unfamiliar to readers, but those things have become absorbed into a much wider cultural
vernaculars. And so I suppose in both cases, I am questioning whether this work really was so cut
off from society, whether it was so esoteric, because I think it was dealing with sort of
very socially, in both cases, they were dealing with very socially and politically urgent things,
and I think they remain so. Now in their cases, whether those would still remain so in 200 years
from now, well, I can only guess. I believe so. I mean, again, I'm speculating there, but
I believe so in the same way that, you know, I can read Dante nowadays, and that is incredibly vivid
to me. Some of the more esoteric pieces of medieval theology take at least some sort of
extra annotations to understand, I find, certainly stuff in parody so. But nonetheless,
as a narrative, as a form of social commentary, when this incredible thing of deciding which
circles of hell you will consign people, you know, and public figures to, I think it's absolutely
gripping, even though it dates from the best part of a millennium ago. And I don't necessarily see
any reason why Stravinsky and Eliot won't be the same. I do think some very, very topical art
that deals with very, very much issues of their time, which do not necessarily project out much
further, tends to date a lot more. And this is a reason that I'm quite skeptical about a lot of
explicitly political art. No, not all. It's stuff that's absolutely rooted in response to concrete
events. Well, there's various reasons that I'm skeptical about it. One is the obvious one that
when those events cease to be current, the art loses a lot of its immediacy. But there's also
the issue of whether there's something exploitative about this, whether it's sort of rendering a
trustee's into art, whether it's taking some of the edge off them by rendering them aesthetic,
which is sort of how Adorno's critique of that worked.
Well, unless there's something in the style and substance of the work that is so transcendently
interesting that the pretext for its creation simply falls by the wayside. So for instance,
if you take, this is a random example, I suppose, but if you take the novels or the journalistic
work of Hunter S. Thompson, so the things that he was describing at the time are no longer of
particular public interest, their political events or events of the day that are now decades
beyond us. But nevertheless, there's something in the style, in the substance of those works
that is phenomenally interesting and that transcends the original subject matter.
So in the best case, in the best case, I think that the work can survive on that basis.
I absolutely agree. And that's a sort of testament to quite what a good writer Hunter S. Thompson
was. It's why it's probably a mistake to see his work primarily in terms of specific events
that he's looking at, but rather in terms of the much wider concerns that he's drawing out of them.
And yes, I could say that about any number of other things. I could say that about Guernica, for example.
So where does that leave the statement that I was just making before?
I think it's about sort of distinguishing,
I'm going to use some very old fashioned vocabulary here, distinguishing between
human concerns and localised political concerns.
Now, what would I'm trying to think of some other examples? I mean this...
Ode to Napoleon, for example, or the Eroica Symphony. I mean, you're entering into the realm
of archetypes and symbols and that, so there may be a contemporary pretext for producing the work.
It may refer on some level to a contemporary figure.
Well, let me give you another example of something of the opposite tendency,
but it's actually someone whose work I rather like. I don't know if you know his British playwright,
James Graham. No.
All right. Well, there's probably a reason why you don't know him and probably not many people
outside of Britain know him. He's very obsessed with British politics, as am I,
and he's written a whole load of plays which are dramatising particular events in British politics.
He wrote a play called The House, which is set in the House of Commons during the 70s,
and it's set in the whips office, the people who are whip up support for things, and it follows
all the machinations that go on and how exactly they manipulate people to get their vote. At a
particular time in British history where the Labour Party who were in power lost their majority
in the House of Commons through losing various by-elections, and even before they lost it,
it was down to one or two votes could mean whether they would lose or win some parliamentary votes.
Now, he traces this, and if you're interested in that, which I am, it's absolutely fascinating,
and he wrote a screenplay about how the Brexit campaign was managed by Dominic Cummings,
who was played by Benedict Cumberbatch in that. I say I enjoy his things, I'll always go and watch
the new ones, but I can see if you don't have that very specialised interest, I'm not sure how much
else would come out. I suppose something about the way the business of politics works in general,
for which parallels could be found in other contexts as well, but I think it goes quite
on those things, and so I'd say I like seeing them, but they're not particularly
places I'd want to see many times, or that I imagine will have any sort of long lasting sort
of impact. So I suppose that's what I'm thinking of. The other objections that I'm saying about
political art, I think are possibly more vivid in their own way. So I have problems, even with
the work like Luigi Nono's D'Gorda Cosi di Hanno Fatou in Auschwitz, which was written as originally
as incidental music for Peter Weiss's play Die Ermittlung, the investigation, which was essentially
a reconstruction of parts of the Frankfurt Auschwitz trials. And in his programme note for the work,
Nono himself says that what the transcripts of the trials can't represent is
the voice of the Six Million Dead, and that's what he wants to do in his music. Now I think,
first of all, that's incredibly presumptuous, and I don't think any artist should claim to be
doing that. But beyond that, it's a strangely very beautiful piece. It's a very haunting piece.
It's a piece, dare I say, to enjoy. And when you can see where I'm leading from that,
it's turning genocide into an aesthetic spectacle. So if Adorno said, at one point,
I know he retracted this later, he said there could be no lyric poetry after Auschwitz.
Well, this is making lyric poetry out of Auschwitz, which is moving on to a whole different level.
And I just don't think it's an appropriate response.
It's funny, I had a similar reaction to a much more recent piece, which is
The Opera Innocence by Caio Sarriaho, which is an opera dealing with school shootings.
Oh yes, I haven't seen it.
Right. Well, it documents the story of a school shooting in quite
quite horrendous detail and presents this as an aesthetic object, I suppose. And
that made me intensely uncomfortable. And you could argue, well, that's perhaps the
point is to put that in your face and present the reality of it in a context where one might
not be expecting such a thing. But it seemed to me at the time, and this is acknowledging
the greatness of the work. I think it is her best opera. I think it's a very fine work.
The musical substance of it is outstanding. But nevertheless, it raised a question in my mind,
is this actually appropriate? Is this something that one can address in an opera?
Well, I'm interested to know more about the types of musical means she used and
what you think made it particularly a set as size there. But I suppose the question I would
always ask there is, why is this an opera? Why is it not a film? Why is it not a play?
Why is it not a documentary even? I remember someone talking about a projected piece
that would deal with the phenomenon of punch and duty shows here and what that meant in terms of
domestic violence at the time. You know, very relevant concern, absolutely. But I was, I never
really got around to asking them, why is this piece of music there? And why are you using a
particular artistic medium? And it's something I wonder about a lot of work I see nowadays,
where I think the nominal subject matter seems to have an importance way over and above what
the musical content is. And somehow it's seen by some as to render questions of the musical value
almost irrelevant. But in the end, if it is a work of music, I want to know why
music's being used for this. I mean, supposing I want to get off a sort of Nazi example,
because those are so full of problems. But I could imagine someone setting a gulag chorus or
something in opera, and I could imagine this being absolutely dreadful, if it was done a certain way.
It could make light of the gulag experience so much. And you know, I can think of other things,
even in opera, I like very much Billy Bird of Britain, but I know how brutalising the conditions
were in the Royal Navy at that time. Now, I mean, some of that comes across certainly
through the flogging scene and things like that. But when you see them singing their sea shanties
at night, there's a sort of sense that they've found some reasonably happy reconciliation
to their lot. That might have been a necessity, for sure. But somehow it just seems all a bit too
warm at that point. I mean, I'm probably being a bit harsh on that, because that opera certainly
does deal in some senses with other aspects. But yes, I'm back again to the question of why
use music, particularly why I have something sung rather than spoken, or why even fictionalise
something in some cases. Now, I can certainly see arguments for doing so in even including
things which are dealing with greater atrocities. Sometimes a fiction can reveal a reality that
a documentary approach might not. But I think these questions can easily be treated rather too
lightly. We've come off with a bit of a tangent, and I feel like I need to return to some thread,
but I've forgotten exactly where we were. You were talking about Sarajah's opera,
which I really want to see, and I haven't seen now. And I was thinking of other examples,
well, there's a piece I wrote for the conversation a few years ago, where I looked a bit critically
at the Nanna work, and also at Penderecki's Threnadie, which, as we know, was given its title
about Hiroshima after it was composed. The very fact of that makes me a bit skeptical,
where this is sort of appropriating a traumatic event to artificially sort of
paced on some relevance to our work. Opportunistically also, yes, yeah.
But as comparing with actually a more musically conservative work in some senses,
but I do think it's remarkable being Shostakovich's 13th Symphony after poems by Yev Deschenko
to do in part with the Babiyar massacre, there is actually a range of poems, they deal with
several subjects. But that simply doesn't become is a type of atrocity pornography
and I think it's remarkable for that, Shostakovich resists that temptation
to write some sort of, some sort of Lamentosa work, which will never be sufficient for the scale
of what's being represented. So no, I think it's a piece that actually invites a form of active
rational engagement with what it's doing, rather than using it as for some sort of emotional
catharsis. And maybe that's the thing, I think using, using traumatic events for that purpose,
I think is in questionable taste at the very limit. And I've, you know, I've written a bit
recently about endless pieces we get about climate change. It's very fashionable to write
a piece about climate change. Now, if I'm going to look critically at this, don't think for a moment
this means I'm trying to sort of, in a sense, minimize the importance of climate change as an
issue, I think it's absolutely urgent and the consequences are incredibly serious in so many
respects. But I just wonder what people are doing by writing a piece of music about it,
which will probably get heard by a small community of listeners in the new music world,
few of who will need convincing that climate change is a bad thing,
whether it's really, whether these things are really adding to our understanding
any more so than could be done by other means.
Well, I suspect it's a form of in-group affirmation,
ultimately. And there's a lot of that in the new music community.
Sure. And that's not new. I mean, some of the political references even in Mozart operas may
have actually taken the same form that when he was writing Don Giovanni's singing Viva la Libertà,
he wasn't particularly saying something to his audiences as to some of his patrons to show that
he was in support of a particular political direction there. So in a sense, that was a type
of virtue signalling to an in-crowd as well. But I think, I mean, I don't, it would be too harsh
just to condemn such things out of hand. I suppose I'm bothered when I think these become the primary
focus of attention. And the rest of the music doesn't seem to count for very much. And I see this
certainly in academic contexts with music, where ultimately, there are many composers
employed by universities who are often writing in and in some sort of what I might say post-Avancard
idiom for now, which draws upon some of the techniques and styles and genres that were
associated with the avant-garde at its peak, rather necessarily developing wholly new ones.
But in a language which will ultimately be esoteric to many academic managers,
to many research funding bodies, to many of the other people that they have to please in order
to secure a solid future within academia. And so if they can link their piece to other things,
which are not in themselves, anything necessary to do with music, this is a good career strategy.
If that sounds a bit of cynical views, because it is.
Those two things are not necessarily mutually exclusive. You can have an optimized career
strategy and also be a great artist. And in fact, I think the great artist who is hopelessly unable
to communicate with anybody who is socially inept and who can't make a strong case for their work
is going to be at a significant disadvantage, I would imagine.
Yeah, no, I do agree with that. But I think it's possible to make a case for work in
other terms. But I recognize that's hard for those working in particular, as I say, post-Avancard
idioms. And that might actually say something reluctant, though I am, to go down this road about
whether it's ever possible that those idioms in themselves can have any wider communicative
potential. Well, communicative is probably not the best word. The whole series of communications
have their own sorts of qualities, which are not necessarily the best, the most applicable
to music. Maybe I like using the word, though it's become a bit of a cliche, resonance, or whether
the music resonates and it's got a literal musical dimension to it. As I say, it's just
become a little bit overused to become hackneyed. But I think it's possible that music can resonate
rather than, in some sense, conveying a meaning. Or it can be meaningful without having a meaning.
It doesn't have an object in the same way as, say, figurative art does, or a lot of uses of language
can. Well, it's certainly possible for esoteric aesthetic directions to communicate to a very
large number of people. That's happened on many occasions. The classic example is possibly the
Right of Spring, which is enormously popular work and has an immediate power of seduction
and expression that is self-evident. As for where that may stand in the present day, I'm
considerably less convinced about composers able to take what might be by contemporary standards
might be, let's say, esoteric or aesthetics that notably diverge from
the bulk of musical practices in the composition world and manage to find a large
audience doing that. I don't know. I think that that would be extraordinarily difficult.
I haven't seen too many examples of that, certainly. And if I were to survey the composition
landscape of the past 30 or 40 years, what are the individual works that have had anything like
even an iota of significance in comparison with the work Like the Right of Spring?
Now, you could argue that's something that reveals itself over time, that we need decades,
perhaps half a century or more before the work reveals itself in its full dimensions.
But I don't think that's necessarily the case. There are certainly works that find a broad audience
and create a significant impact very shortly after their premiere. It just doesn't seem to be
happening. And this is something that emerged as a kind of light motif in the discussions I had with
intellectuals, public figures, people from the business world who attended the art conference
in London back in October. Now, I had the opportunity to exchange with quite a number
of people at that event, including prominent intellectuals from all sides of the political
spectrum. And one recurring motif was the question, what are the artists doing? Where are they? Where
have they gone? Where are the great figures of today? We mentioned T.S. Eliot and Stravinsky as
two sort of emblematic examples, but is there anybody today who can claim to have anything
like that measure of public notoriety, significance, critical attention? I'm quite doubtful about that.
At least maybe not in the high cultural field, in popular cultural fields and possibly.
I'm not sure right now, but at least in the last 50 years, I can think of figures there.
You know, I can think of various popular musicians, I can think of jazz musicians,
late jazz musicians, because I sort of think jazz morphed into other things around about
the time of the 1970s onwards. Well, that's sort of what I call the one last push theory,
that if we wait a bit of time and we push things like new music just a bit more,
eventually, audiences will come around. Right. No, this is... I mean, I don't believe that.
I don't believe that for a second. The idea, and this has been floated since at least the 1950s,
if not longer, is that, well, it's because audiences aren't familiar enough with it,
so if you can educate them, if you can explain to them what's going on in the work,
then they'll come around to it. The problem is that they don't have the context,
they don't understand what artists are doing, so you need to be an advocate,
you need to explain it to them, and so on. In my experience, that simply doesn't work.
There are branches of new music that simply do not have the capacity, I believe, to communicate
broadly to a large number of people, and it's to do with the work. It's not to do with
deficiencies in the sensibility or the education or the experience of the people who are listening.
Now, that's an attitude that you see quite commonly in modernist composers such as
Eliot Carter, who is constantly saying things along the lines that, well, the music is difficult,
but people will just have to become more clever, and, well, where does that lead you?
Well, can I take a sort of middle ground position on this? I go home after I've been working hard
someday, and I don't always want to read some Goethe. I don't always want to be
watching some classic Japanese cinema. I don't always want to be listening to some late Brahms.
These are all things I like very much indeed, but, yes, I sometimes want something a bit lighter
that's not unintelligent, but is entertaining and gives me a chance to relax a bit, and I
never criticize anyone else for wanting to do the same. I would worry a lot if that's all
there was in culture, and I think that's a very real worry to have, but I started asking myself
a while ago, maybe at least 10 years ago, maybe even more, of a lot of the types of
avant-garde music that I've played, how often do I choose to actually listen to them myself?
And I mean, I certainly do, but not as often as one might think. I mean, when it's just listening,
because I'm interested, rather than listening because I need to learn more about something,
because I'm writing about it, or I'm listening to recordings in the process of preparing
interpretation or something like that, but just listening, for pleasure doesn't seem quite the
right way to put it, but listening for my own edification, I suppose, I've thought it's not
actually all that often. And then I ask myself, similarly, how often do I listen to early music?
Same here, or how often would I listen to even something like the Matas Passion?
And they're for special occasions. I mean, there are times when I've got time,
and I've got a clear head, and I really want to concentrate, and I really want something
that goes as deep as those things are. And if you know, as someone who's quite intensely
involved with these things as part of their work, if it's not so often that I get the chance to do
that, then what's the chance for those working in other fields? Who don't have that? But from that,
I still don't think that necessarily has to be a problem. I think there can be many forms of art,
which are, let's go back to the first question, which are great, which are demanding,
and which are not probably for casual or recreational viewing, listening, reading,
or whatever. But I don't think that in any sense minimizes their significance or their importance.
Well, if I could just continue one thing on that, because I want to look,
I mean, the Eliot Carter example is interesting there. In a sense, I can see that I can view
Carter's work, which I like very much, and I've played most of his piano music,
is an extension of that. And Carter's work,
if I say there's, in one small sense, it's slightly conservative. I don't mean that in any sort of
denigratory fashion. I mean, in a sense, it's music that situates itself in a particular
relationship to traditions, which I think is quite clear. It's not radically iconoclastic work,
never has been, not in the way that certainly things like Cage or Schnabel or Globacar might be,
not things that are really sort of trying to make you redefine the whole question of what music is.
Carter's work uses an expressive language, which has a clear lineage behind it. He uses forms,
which are certainly informed by his own particular means, not least on a metrical level, but on the
other hand, they still somehow relate to established forms in things. And so that
gives the point of reference. That gives, for those familiar with that tradition,
you can hear it relative, listen to it relative to that tradition if you're familiar with that.
And what that would mean to someone not familiar with that tradition is not necessarily so
clear. But, and this is the question, like I think so many involved in new music, I've evaded
for a long time, but I can't really get away from is simply about atonality. Now, if I define
atonality as, or atonal music is music which is not organized around single tonal centers for any
appreciable amount of time. I mean, I don't think there's almost any fully atonal music,
music where you can't hear some localized tonal centers at various points, but they're so
diffuse and so changing in atonal music as to essentially issue that sort of sense of
some gravitational force such as a more long range tonal organization provides.
Atonal music is disorienting. It is alienating, I think, to an awful lot of people. I mean,
every bit of evidence points to that the lack of much of an atonal tradition in almost any other
world culture. Perhaps you could find some, something akin in, say, gagaku music or so on,
but it's not really comparable. I wonder about this. This is a question that I ask myself quite
often as well. Now, I don't think I'm being self-deluding about this because obviously I write
completely chromatic music and indeed sometimes infracromatic music with microtones and so on.
My sense is, having worked with a lot of students and having exchanged with a very broad range of
audience members through my public lecturing and through the work I've done as a composer as well,
my sense is that the organization of the tones is not really at the forefront of most people's
concerns when they're listening to things and finding them perhaps too esoteric or too difficult
to handle. I think the absence of identifiable patterns in music is extremely challenging for
audiences, but that can come through any means, actually. It's not simply a matter of the
organization of tones. I think it may have to do somewhat with rhythm. I think that the
tendency of the second Viennese school composers, for example, and certainly the generation that
came after that, to work with rhythmic patterns that do not relate in any obvious manner to
a meter, to a pattern, I think that that's more destabilizing than any degree of
atonality in the music. There are so many examples of ostensibly tonal music that is so far into
the margins of what constitutes any kind of functionality that it's difficult to make a
case for the piece being in this or that key. For example, you can cite certain passages in
Wagner, you can cite Hugo Woeuf, certainly, where it's extraordinarily difficult to determine
if many of those songs are, in fact, in a key at all. You can cite Debussy, you can look at
certain works by Hindemith, you can look at things like the Bagatelle Santonalité of Liszt.
Those works don't seem to disturb anybody. Well, the Bagatelle Santonalité, I'd say, is in B minor.
Okay. Well, that settles it.
I think it's simply a piece that lacks a clear tonic in root position,
rather than lacks a tonal center. There's a very, very clear tonal organization in that.
It's nothing like the cutter drift in the way that Schoenberg from Op. 11 onwards is.
And when you're talking about recognizable patterns, well, what about in Schoenberg's
Suite Op. 25, or the Third String Quartet, or the Variations for Orchestra, do these not use a quite
readily recognizable rhythmic vocabulary and gestural vocabulary as well?
Which I thought, I mean, I've seen some fascinating talks about these works, which
actually push the pitch organization to one side and look at them more primarily in gestural terms.
And actually how subtle the gestural and rhythmic working is in them.
And which, you know, which I find fascinating. It's a lot more than about what makes these,
to my mind, quite remarkable pieces than just saying how the rose manipulated.
But sorry, it's a little tangent here, but you might find it's quite interesting here that
I was just in a conference at Dublin last week, and I was sort of supporting a postgraduate student
who was giving a paper, which I had some input into. We're looking at the role of music theory
analysis comparatively in Scottish and Irish educational systems and how this relates to
secondary provision and so on. And one thing she found from talking to teachers in Scotland is they
said, serialism is a gift for teaching, because it's not difficult for students to learn how to
just invert and retrograde the row, and then just combine that and they create something in the process.
Yeah, whether there's something you'd ever want to listen to is another question. But
I mean, this to me portrays such a narrow understanding of what serial music is, and
certainly what the serial music of Schoenberg or Berg or Webern is, that there are so many other
aspects which are defining to what makes it so distinctive. It's not just about the row
manipulation. And as we know, Schoenberg reacted quite negatively to Rudolf Kirlisch,
coming back and saying, I've worked out this is how the row works in the third string quartet.
So I suppose I'm saying from this that I'm not sure that those other factors that you think
are probably more important for listeners than pitch organisation. I'm not sure if those things
aren't present in a lot of these works, which nonetheless, have never gone on to have the
same sustained and wide listenership that works of Stravinsky or Bartok or Prokofiev have. And
I don't in any sense want to sort of suggest that those latter group composers are any less
modern. In fact, in some sense is more so than the second Viennese school.
And you could trace a different sort of history through the 20th century, which
is certainly focused on lots of very innovative developments. I mean,
was obviously with Debussy, as you mentioned, but which I don't believe ultimately give up on
some form of tonal organisation. I don't believe Debussy does. We were saying about Wagner, Hugo
Volf. I think for momentary periods, they go off directions, but I think it's still ultimately clear.
I think even in Charles Ives, that's the case as well.
Well, the harmony is fundamentally triadic in nature most of the time,
even though it may not be obvious how the modulatory scheme works and how it might all
relate to essential tonality. But something along those lines, having an extended tonality
that is fundamentally centred around triads is probably, that might be the marker. But then
again, it's very complicated. It's terribly difficult to parse it all out because a lot of
the harmony in Opus 11 is triadic, if you look at the chords.
But modified triads with added notes that sort of preclude them from fulfilling the
usual triadic functions. Yes, but Scriabin, it's tricky, it's tricky.
Yes, but it's more directional in Scriabin, I think.
Depends. Some of those pieces are quite static in their harmonic effect, I would argue.
I think of the opening of the eight sonata, for example.
That's just a modified cadence in A, I think, for all the high amount of chromaticism.
It's still got these basic cadential function working underneath it.
Look at the beginning of the tenth sonata. It starts with essentially
outlining an augmented triad on G-flat, and then that moves down to an E-flat minor triad.
That to me is just a certain type of cadence from the third to the first degree of the scale,
as in terms of the bass line, that it's not...
Now, but then if I say look at one of the most tonal of Schoenberg's early A tonal works being
the Opus 11 number two. So, for any listening to this who don't know this piece, it starts with an
oscillating F and D in the bass and a lower F, an octave below the higher one,
which could very simply imply a D minor harmony. But then when the melody comes above that,
it's quite... It goes from D-flat to A, and then down a tri-tone to E-flat, and up a fourth to A-flat,
and then back down a tri-tone to D. But inevitably that D naturalism here
sounds to me like a resolution. And when I'm hearing the other chromatic notes,
they're just implying a resolution that's going to come. Now Schoenberg does this,
but sometimes he holds back or doesn't even resolve, but...
No, clearly. Well, I would argue that that principle is operative to a greater or lesser
degree in a lot of the works, where the E-flat sounds like a flat supertonic more or less.
It's the same in the slow movement of the fourth quartet to a degree. It seems to have,
which coincidentally also sounds like it's in D minor. So it's a question of degree,
but I'm not convinced by the idea that that is the level on which these works are fundamentally
challenging for audiences. It may have to do with the rate of change, with the constant
onslaught of new chromatic pitches, the harmonic rhythm. The harmonic rhythm in the
right of spring is drastically slowed down in comparison.
And we know Schoenberg didn't like repetition, and this might be a key thing here.
Yes, there's a sort of information overload.
Well, if you take a work like De Stade by Andreessen, you have rhythmic patterns that are
obvious and easy to hear. You have tonal patterns that are obvious and easy to hear. The harmonic
rhythm is extremely slow. You have gestures and contrasts that form very clear and simple
formal markers in the piece. It's hypnotic, it's repetitive, and so on.
It's not obvious to me that De Stade is a more popular work than the fourth string quartet
of Schoenberg. Maybe it is, but I don't know that that's the level on which... Do you see what I mean?
It's tricky. I think we'd need some empirical data for this. We need to play some audiences,
both the works, and then engage their responses to them.
There might be some who are quite conservative listeners who think the Schoenberg sounds quite
refined, and whereas I think the Andreessen's all a bit too noisy and riotous. That's very
possible, but I think you could say the same about the Rite of Spring as well.
Well, I tried an experiment with my students when I was teaching at the conservatory in Cambrai in
northern France, and I had some younger students in that class. We were doing a course on musical
analysis, and the idea was to alternate 20th century works with more established classical
works. We were looking at late romanticism. We were looking at things like Wagner and
Mahler and so on, and then one week I brought in the five orchestral pieces by Schoenberg,
and we listened to them. To the students, it wasn't immediately obvious that the
tonal organization of that work was in some fundamental manner all that different from
a more chromatic example, say, from Liszt or Wagner. Now, that kind of surprised me. I wasn't
expecting that reaction, but it was in fact repeated multiple times, and if I asked them to
say, well, which work is tonal and which work is non-tonal, it wasn't necessarily categorically
obvious to them. How well versed in the standard repertoire would those students have been?
Well, they were younger, so presumably their exposure to the repertoire would have been
limited, I imagine. They would have probably been centering themselves around a small number of
works that they were attempting to master on their instruments. I don't get the sense that they would
go home and listen to ten symphonies a day. So not really immersed in the tradition?
No. Because this presents an interesting sort of comparison to something that
my friend, the musicologist, Eva-Marida Rodriguez, was telling me that she was teaching to some
students some ideas coming from the new musicology out of the work from the 90s, particularly about
queer musicology and how some works of Schubert and Tchaikovsky have been analyzed in terms of their
particular harmonic patterns and their structural organizations as a quite alternative model of
tonal organization to the dominant one coming from Beethoven and so on, which I think is actually
quite a powerful explanation that whether this maps onto sexuality, I think, is open to question.
But there's no doubt to me that Tchaikovsky's approach to writing a symphony was quite fundamentally
different to Beethoven's. And at the very least, these paradigms have gone some way to explaining
how that organization is considerably different, and particularly the substitution of more
relationships between harmonic riches based upon thirds rather than fifths is quite a fundamental
thing found there. And so it's as a way of bypassing some of the clear sort of dominant tonic
opposition, which is still so fundamental in Beethoven, as you can see in those endless 5-1
alternations at the end of some of the symphonies, for example. But apparently this was lost a lot
of the students. They just said, oh, that all sounds like classical music. The differences
between Beethoven and Tchaikovsky was probably something akin to the narcissism of small differences.
It was a world that at most they saw from the perspective of an outsider.
And maybe it's possible now if you take the Schoenberg 5 orchestral pieces that, you know,
those are still composed using an orchestral idiom in terms of the use of the instruments
that's now well established, has been much imitated or much drawn upon.
And itself, you can quite clearly link to some of that that you find in Wagner, in Rekard Strauss,
and in others. Let me show them by text in new directions, but it belongs within a tradition
and other aspects of texture, of rhythm, of density. These things certainly overlap to a large
degree with lots of other works in the tradition. And so I'm wondering if when the whole music is
not something that's become second nature, when the tradition's not become second nature to students,
whether the things that we see as crucial differences are not yet so apparent, but maybe
with a greater degree of familiarity they would become. Absolutely. Well, there's a quote, you'll
probably know who this poet is, which is, when the lights are dim, all cats would be gray. If you
don't have enough illumination to see distinctions between things, then everything, of course,
looks the same to you. But still, just the relative lack of differentiation, I'm not sure
that's any signifier that this is going to generate amongst these sorts of less-tutored minds,
a new sort of enthusiasm for Schoenberg, orchestral music. But I might be wrong on that.
What I'm trying to say here, the latest article I read just very recently,
which, okay, to put it in a nutshell, it's saying if you lose a classical tradition,
you'll lose contemporary classical music as well, which I think is accurate.
I think ultimately, the audiences for, well, I still like the term new music, which comes,
which is something I date back to about 1918, the audiences for that,
those who would pursue that music or a lot of it with real sort of sustained enthusiasm
will come from those who are also used to grappling with the intricacies and the complexities
of music in the Western classical tradition. Now, that's a quite unfashionable position to
take nowadays, and it's far from uncommon to find amongst composers a view that, no, this music has
to sort of get away from that tradition, and the new audiences are to be found amongst those
who listen to more popular music or jazz or things like that. Twitch, I'd say,
hey, I don't think I haven't yet seen much evidence of that process happening on any
sustained level. There are odd cases for sure, but...
I think what I'm trying to establish is that the differences for, let's say,
a non-specialized audience between late list, for example, Wagner, Schoenberg, Bartok, Debussy
are comparatively minor. They're not colossal differences in the sense that they might reveal
themselves to a more well-versed or specialized listener. But so my argument is that that's
fundamentally not where this breakdown seems to occur. I think that that happens in the post-war
era, and I think it has possibly partly to do with stylistic matters, but not exclusively. I
think it has to do with the way the music is being disseminated, with the way that the composers
may be addressing their audience or not addressing it, their attitude towards the audience,
and the progressive entrenchment of the compositional tradition into academia and into
things that are extremely distant, in fact, from the want of a better term, from the quotidian
concerns of everyday people. Schoenberg is certainly a radical figure within that tradition,
but he's still within that tradition, very demonstratively so. There isn't really a break,
there's an acceleration, there's an intensification, there's an increased degree of complexity, I
suppose, but there isn't a categorical break, but I do think that occurs in the in the post-war
era. Well, one explanation for this is the idea that essentially the Second Vanity School
represent the end of a tradition, and possibly you could extend it a bit further, maybe Carter
would belong with that, maybe Verninger would belong within that, but all sort of playing a type of
end game. Music that strikes by seeing what's still possible to do out of what's been inherited
from that tradition, rather than setting down blueprints for a whole new directions, which I
think is what Stravinsky and Bartok and Prokofiev did. So the response of those who wanted to build
upon the achievements of Second Vanity School was generally to strip it out from most of that sort
of early 20th century Viennese expression that came with it, and all the other trappings of tradition
that were there, which I think are absolutely defining to the music, in fact more defining
than the serial organization, in the case of the Dodecophonic works, I mean.
But in that, and yes, you're right, I mean, even in Stravinsky, and Debussy, and Prokofiev,
and so on, I mean, this music didn't come from nowhere, this wasn't sort of ripped up and started
again, you know, you can easily trace Stravinsky back to Remsky Korsakov, to Misorgsky, to Tchaikovsky,
and some senses to Italian opera and some French music and so on. You can easily trace Prokofiev
back to similar things. For those familiar with that sort of period in French music that's perhaps
least well known in between the deaths of Berlioz and the first mature works of Debussy, so in the
1870s and 1880s, the period right after the Franco-Pression War, when you see important works of
Fauré, of Chabret, of Messonni, and others, once you have a sort of degree of familiarity with
that tradition, then it's not so difficult to see where Debussy comes from, combined with
influences from Russian music and from Wagner and elsewhere, that, I mean, for radical composers, they
moved music on by quite palpable degree, but it didn't come out of nowhere. But nor did Boulers,
nor did Schlockhausen, they didn't come out of nowhere. I mean, Boulers, at least in time,
became quite explicit about this, how much he felt that what had been achieved by Debussy,
by Bartok, by Strominski, by Schoenberg, by Berg, was there to build, by Varez as well,
was there to build on, whilst rejecting some aspects of it as well. And I've probably said to
you before how I'll never accept the Stundinal theory of new music after 1945. First of all,
because actually, in terms of what was being predominantly written and performed after 1945,
in no sense constituted a Stundinal.
Could you lay out what that means for our listeners?
Sorry, Stundinal zero hour in Germany. It's a theory of history, which is treated with a lot
of skepticism by his Reuser period now. But it's the idea that essentially, Germany had been destroyed,
reduced to rubble, and everything had to start again from first principles. And that this would
happen in music and culture that the whole, the languages inherited from the past had been thoroughly
discredited by the associations with Nazism. And so something new that broke with these completely
had to be created in its place.
Well, that doesn't account for a figure like Henson.
No, it certainly doesn't, nor for at least up until the late 1950s, the figures that were
extremely dominant in German new music, who were people like, well, like Carl Orth for a start,
Wolfgang Fortner, like Werner Eck, like Boris Blacker, Hindemith very much. So yes,
even though he was out of the country, but he was being played a lot. And younger figures,
including Hans Werner, Henson, and one that's now pretty much forgotten, but was very big,
Gieselic Kleber, who was getting commissioned here and everywhere. And someone like Stockhausen,
and the slightly younger figures such as Hans Otter, or such as Dieter Schnabel,
just a couple of years younger than Stockhausen, these people were very much on the margins.
And Otter found his way through writing music that was essentially like his teacher, Hindemith,
for a while before in the 60s, he moved into a more sort of
aleatory music and more radical idioms there. I mean, my point is the avant-garde was on the
margins throughout most of the early post-war period. It was through the influence of people
like Herbert Eimer, who had a very important position at clone radio, and was something
of an avant-garde himself that managed to push things so that by the time, not earlier than
the early 60s, some of the avant-garde was starting to move more into the mainstream there. But
I mean, that was to explain, I don't believe Stundernull, if there had been a Stundernull,
you would have had very few of those other tendencies.
This meeting, zero hour?
Yes, zero hour. But that zero hour model, which informed quite a bit of the
historiography of new music, this is something I'm writing about at the moment,
particularly the stuff published in the 70s and 80s, presented this as a new language had to be
built up from first principles, almost literally from elementary particles and integral serialism,
pointless music, seem a maps onto that sort of metaphor very well, because you can see individual
notes, which somehow removed from any of the previous functional relationships that they might
have had, form the particles of the new music, and then new types of macroscopic organization,
especially if you find something like Stockhausen's Gruppen, enable ways of developing a more
sophisticated language out of this.
Well, I certainly agree that it's far too simplistic to ascribe the Second World War as
the moment in which everything fundamentally shifts permanently and that there's no recovering it.
I think that's far too simplistic. Nevertheless, it clearly accelerated certain forces that were
perhaps already operative before that period. And you could perhaps say that we're at the,
perhaps the end of a very long historical process that's been playing out over 100,
150 years. But nevertheless, there is for me a categorical difference between where we are now
with the manner in which a composer may interface with their audience versus what was the case
in the time of Schoenberg. I think that it's a categorical difference. It's no longer a matter
of degree. If you go from one generation to the next, you can say, well, if you compare
the attitude of Schoenberg versus Les, for example, you can say, well, it's not a complete break.
There are still some common features. But if you were to jump three generations or four generations
and then compare, then I think it would be increasingly difficult to see
any sense of affiliation, any sense of connection by that point. And I suppose my argument now is
that a figure like Schoenberg, although obviously his music is radical and it was in its time and
continues to be for many people in alienating language, nevertheless, his intention, his aim,
which you can easily trace in the music, was not fundamentally different from the attitude of a
Beethoven who wants to address everybody fundamentally. The language in which he's doing so
may be rebarbative, it may be challenging. But I believe that's his fundamental aspiration.
It's his hope that the work will eventually find its audience. It will eventually be
comprehensible and it will speak to humanity in the broadest sense. I simply don't believe that
for a lot of composers working today, that is their ambition. And I don't believe that they
believe that that's even something that one can aspire to today. Now, obviously, you could say
I'm making a bit of a paper tiger out of these figures. I'm not citing names, but as a general
phenomenon, my sense is that the expectations that artists have today in terms of what might be
possible to do are significantly lower. Yes, I think that's true. But I'm not completely sure
if I agree with you on how similar Schoenberg and Beethoven were in that respect. I mean,
Schoenberg did still say if it's for all, then it's not art. I'm not sure on what basis the
evidence is that Schoenberg really was intending, or at least imagining, that he was going to write
a music that would speak to all people. I mean, it's often that thing that he apparently said
to Josef Rufa about I've come across a new technique that will sustain German music for another
hundred years. He probably didn't say that. No, but those two statements are in contradiction to
one another. You have to be careful with the proclamations of composers. It's not self-evident
that he actually believed that. When he would say, for example, if it's art, it's not for everybody,
and if it's for everybody, it's not for art. I don't know that he necessarily believed that.
Maybe he did, but you have to look at the work and what the work is aiming to do.
I'm not utterly convinced by that.
Well, how about if I put it a slightly different way? I say Schoenberg was aiming to write music
whose greatness he thought would ultimately be realized by all, but that didn't mean
that all would want to listen to it. Right. Whereas I think Beethoven did imagine
probably most of those who thought it was great would want to listen to it as well.
Even the late string quartets, the Grosse figure. Maybe not by that stage,
but that's quite exceptional within his own output, even within his late output,
where Charles Rosenscher is very well, how to some extent he actually returns to some of the
more strict formal models from his earlier work in comparison to some of the late mid-period works,
where he's pushing the boundaries of form all the more. Even the Hammerklavier sonata,
the first movement, is in a quite strict traditional sonata form in many ways,
more so than some of the other sonatas that surround it.
That's the sort of thing I'd link to a whole phenomenon within certain types of modernism
that were about expanding resources, but also reinscribing a certain sort of new formal discipline.
As well. You can find that across the arts, especially in architecture,
and you find that there's a deep classicizing strain in most of the modern movement, I would say.
They were in some ways reacting against late romantic excess, and the same is true,
I think, in a lot of music as well.
This is where, you know, the model that, well, it's actually Richard Tereskin has developed it a
lot, though it draws upon lots of us before him, of his period of maximalism between around 1890
to around 1918 in music, where you see the most opulent extravagant works of Strauss,
of Schoenberg, of the earlier Ravel, and of lots of other figures,
which contrast so strongly with this paring down and narrowing of resources. I mean,
early Stravinsky would fall into that mode as well, but then when you hear works like the
architect of Stravinsky, you know, you're almost listening to a different composer. I mean, with
real familiarity, one could see the commonalities between the two things,
but in terms of the idiom, in terms of the style, all of that ostentation has gone, and you can see
this in, to a slight, not quite a screen degree, but in Ravel's work before and after around the sort
of mid-1910s, the sort of world of Gaspar, or of Daphnis, is such a different idiom from that,
you find it something like the violin sonata, or L'Enfantilé sortilèche, though he returns to
a bit of it in the left-hand concerto. That's why I say it's not quite so extreme, the gap there,
but that's why I've always thought of 1918 as being the really crucial turning point. It's
reinscribing a cleaner and more objective, if you like, and more disciplined music to get away
from the excesses of expression, and that's, if you follow the debates amongst the sort of
German aestheticians of the left during the 20s, that's very clear, between between the advocates
of expressionism of which Ernst Bloch, and to some extent Adorno, were probably the last true
advocates, and then all the much more common ideas around the Neuers-Achelic guide, and then later on
the new objectivity. And if anything, the new objectivity was maybe new in Germany,
wasn't so new in France, that's at least as far back as the early Sati you see, that sort of
break certainly was the Wagnerian model, and Debussy broke with the Wagnerian model as well,
but not as drastically as Sati did. I think once again, I think this is a progressive
tendency that you see that's been playing out for decades. We may be in the end stages of it,
I don't know, it's hard to have the requisite distance and objectivity to look at these things
properly, but all I can see is judging from the indications that I can observe from people who
are outside of the Neu music world. It certainly appears to be the case that as a cultural force,
as something that may in some manner contribute to shaping our culture, and you could certainly
argue that there's a kind of a trickle down effect where it doesn't reach the ears of most
people, but nevertheless it does eventually find its way down into something that would be more
accessible or popular in nature. But that as a cultural force, it's basically spent,
the game is over, nobody's listening except for interested parties, professional artists,
the people who attend festivals such as Dono Eshingen and Darmstadt, who tend to be music
professionals. But outside of that, there's no, to use your term, there's no wider resonance from
the vast majority of the production of Neu music. That is the indication I'm getting from people
outside of that. Now these are not Philistines, these are not uneducated people, they are in
many instances extraordinarily cultivated, well-versed in culture, extremely well-read,
very familiar with classical music. And this is what I'm hearing.
Well, there are three things that come to mind in the context of all that you're saying there.
The first is to ask whether the idea of a new music cultural sphere, which seems to sort of
communicate only within its own realms to groups of aficionados who go along to festivals,
a lot of them with professional involvement in that scene, to ask really how new that is.
I mean, if you read a lot about the festivals, and there were many in the 1920s, but of which
probably the best known now is that in Dono Eshingen and later in Baden-Baden and Berlin,
I've read enough about the reception of the concerts there, and wider commentary about
festival culture to see many of the same sorts of sentiments being expressed then.
A concern that new music was sort of painting itself into a corner was obsessed with certain
types of experiment over and above the challenges of writing something that might have some
wider currency. And, well, it's quite interesting if we look back at the programs from Dono Eshingen,
I mean, how many Psytopias are known nowadays, whatever happened to those sort of radio
compositions that people, including Hindemith wrote, or, I mean, actually many of the figures there,
I mean, who listens to Heinz Teesson or Ernst Tocke, except perhaps the geographical fugue
nowadays. Even a figure like Stefan Wolper is really very much a composer,
appreciated within a narrow circle, but not that much outside of there. But you did see
things like New Works of Bartok being played at these festivals as well, and those have made
their way into some sort of wider repertoire. So, I am in time going to be writing a new
history of musical modernism in the Weimar Republic, and it strikes me how little of the German
composers of that time are heard with any frequency nowadays. Hindemith's reputation is nothing like
it was when I was younger, let alone what it was in the 50s. Certainly the Second Vanity School are
played, but even even that's within, I mean, I think probably most musicians have encountered
some of their work, but it hasn't really etched you to wider currency. But that to one side,
Kurt Vile's work has definitely had a lasting impression. You don't often hear that advanced
Kronik nowadays. You don't hear Tach, you don't hear Ties, and you don't hear Max Butting.
Any Phillips Janak, any number of other people who are really quite sort of prominent figures in
the 20s and 30s in Germany are now pretty much forgotten. But maybe that's quite
inevitable. I could think of any number of 19th century figures for whom the same could be
said. Maybe if just a few things come out of this festival circuit and go on to continue
to be listened to, that in itself is as much as we might reasonably hope for. So, it might be a bit
premature to say that what's being played in the new music infrastructure is a term I like to use
for it, the network of festivals, of concert series, of radio stations and programmes,
and some educational institutions and journals and things as well. What is known in that,
to say that it has little wider currency, doesn't register outside of that, may not be so new, and
I think we shouldn't wholly rule out the possibility that might be a few things that do.
That's the first point, but my other points might sort of slightly temper that.
The second point I really think is important to bear in mind. When you compare music with
other cultural forms, with literature, with the visual arts, with film and television,
with dance as well, and theatre, I don't think in any of the others is quite as much of a chasm
between the popular and the high art form as exists in music.
You can trace that back to Wagner, if not earlier.
Yes, certainly, but I think it's become especially pronounced in the 20th century.
That, I mean, what perhaps hasn't really existed on any sustained, 20 sustained degree
since figures like Britain and Shostakovich say is, or Kalamides Hartman would be another,
is a sustained tradition of music which somehow,
I don't want, I really don't want to use the term middle brow because I dislike it.
I don't think that's a very fair term for those composers. I don't think those composers are any
less sort of serious or any less demanding than some of their more avant-garde counterpoints.
But they are working comfortably from within a tradition without
engaging any sort of radically iconoclastic activity there. And as such, it's not such a leap
from an interest in that tradition to an interest in their work.
Well, you might be able to cite figures such as John Adams, for example, Philip Glass perhaps,
to a limited degree, George Benjamin, although I would situate him much more in the new music
realm than anything resembling what Benjamin Britton achieved.
Which is, of course, not a commentary on the achievement of George Benjamin, but simply to
point out that he doesn't have that level of cultural penetration or of accessibility in his
work. But then you could say, well, the counterargument could say, well, yes, but a figure such as
Glass, for example, is not as compositionally accomplished. The music is not of as high quality
as a lot of the output of Britton. And it's tricky to find any kind of figure
who would be who would be comparable or analogous in any way whatsoever to someone like that,
I would argue. Well, Satie, perhaps.
Satie? Why so?
Using very sort of limited and delimited compositional resources towards a particular end.
I mean, in terms of what you're saying, Glass being less accomplished as a composer than
Britton. I'm not making that argument. I'm sorry.
It's a devil's advocate position.
Yeah, because I'm not sure that would be easy to justify as an argument.
I mean, we could say that a large amount of Morton Feldman's music is quiet,
so he showed he could write quiet music, but he wasn't so good at the mezzo-forte as a fortissimo.
But that would be a really facile argument. I think because some composers have
stuck within limited realms doesn't make them any less accomplished than those who've done
broader things. I mean, I know Schrockhausen once criticized composer, and it's thought he
might have had people like Ligeti or Zanakis or Feldman in mind, who said, if you want to make
a big name, do something like become the snare drum composer. That's in the Robin McConae book.
So, okay, now I appreciate you saying that as a devil's advocate argument rather than
as your own one. And I think it is true to say that Glass and Adam's iteration,
others have achieved a genuine penetration to a wider public sphere in some ways,
perhaps more so than some more canonical figures. But that's a very particular direction,
and it's not one I want to denigrate by any means. I might have harsher things to say
about some of the propaganda surrounding it, whether coming from
composers or their advocates, and also about the historiography which I've written about,
which sort of posits that everything was going to pot in new music, and then these people came
along and saved their, saved its ass, as it were. And I dislike that sort of rhetoric,
even expressed in slightly less crude terms. But I think that work stands
quite outside of the classical tradition in many ways.
Well, Feldman characterized it as showbiz. He was saying he doesn't take Filt Glass seriously,
because he's in showbiz. He's not a composer, which, you know, you don't have to take that
seriously as a remark, but... Well, some Kurt Wallin showbiz, very literally.
And I'd say he's a very serious composer, and I don't just mean his early works, I mean,
all the way up to his American musicals.
When I wrote my big two-part article on the historiography of minimal music, I posited that
there are three, because I don't think minimal music represents a drastic break.
I think it does represent a break with a lot of Central European traditions,
but it has a clear lineage, and it's sort of one branch coming out of several roots.
And those roots include Musica Sati, above all, the earlier music of Stravinsky,
especially of Lesacre and Lenos. And then, and this is the argument that comes out of
work of Wim Mertens, who wrote one of the early books on minimal music, that it actually comes
out of integral serialism, in a way, and the figure of Hoivetz, who bridges those two worlds,
demonstrates that. Also, the fact that Lamont Young's early work can be seen like a sort of
expansion of Feldman onto a vast, expansion of Weber, onto a vast canvas as well.
That relationship is more complex and difficult. But then, within the traditions bequeased by
those roots, I would include Feldman's music, or Christian Wolf's music on one hand. I would include,
say, some of the work of Nicholas Ahuba, or Ernst Albrecht Stiebler, using very limited resources,
or some aspects of music spectral as well. All those different branches coming out of
a fundamental aesthetic of relative stasis, which rejects this particular dynamic and
dialectical approach to composition. Well, there's an interesting article, actually,
by Jonathan Harvey that deals with that topic. And his contention is that this is the inevitable
heritage of the Weberian project, which is of having a harmony that's completely unmoored
from any kind of a base function. Or rather, as he puts it, the base has moved up into the
middle register, but it's no longer determining the harmony. I think that was published in
contact. You probably have read that article. And that, in consequence, because of this absence of
gravity, so to speak, in the harmony, then it forces you, in a sense, to have a
a significantly slowed down harmonic rhythm. And that leads to, or to a stasis of some kind,
effectively. The music no longer is oriented or grounded. And that leads you to things like
the Feldman pieces. But that's not the only example.
I could trace that sort of unanchored music, if you like, that horizontally focused music
back to such things as the publications of books on linear counterpoint by Ernst Kurt in
1917. And the whole new lease of life that that sort of thought gave to a music that was
about line rather than about harmony as well. That's before some of Weber's major essays in
that sort of genre. But that's that sort of thinking, which is, on one hand, radical,
on the other hand, quite conservative, because it's really looking back to a time before the
19th century, before harmony comes to sort of take precedence over counterpoint and harmony
comes to be taught first towards an idea that counterpoint is at the root of things and harmony
is at most a byproduct of that. But it's using that to a radical end towards the construction
of music, which isn't sort of formed around some tonal principles, which you can still say
of relatively modal counterpoint, at least in the equal temperament era.
Okay, you seem to be arguing in that the points that I've raised in terms of how
the present moment in terms of musical production seems to me to be fundamentally
different from the way it would have been 50 or 60 years ago. That's not even to go back
any farther than that. You seem to be arguing that for many of the points that I'm raising,
there are historical precedents for it, there is a degree of connectedness,
there's nothing fundamentally exceptional about the present moment.
No, I wouldn't quite say that. I think there are differences to the present moment that I was
coming on to when I mentioned about sort of the relationship to popular music, which is something
I would loosely trace back to the early 19th century. It's an urban music fundamentally
associated with the growth of larger cities and so on. And it takes forms of things such as Music Hall
or Cafe Conceal, Cabaret or Vorderville in the 19th century, then through traditions of ragtime,
blues and early jazz and so on. But it really comes together, I think I would say in the 40s,
rather than the mid 50s, mid 50s is commonly the date given for the beginning of rock and roll.
But I would say it comes together with the beginning of Rhythm and Blues as a really
established genre in New Orleans at the beginning of the 40s, which is exactly the point that Fats
Domino was very keen to point out to some interviewer who asked him in the mid 50s,
tell me about this new music called Rock and Roll Your Play. He says,
I call it Rhythm and Blues and I've been playing it in New Orleans since 1940.
So I think it's around that time that something really comes together that forms a truly lasting
tradition which gains a very wide currency and even a global currency in time to come.
And that's a huge thing for an art music tradition to compete with. And I think more so than
let's say literary fiction does with, compared to popular fiction. The chasm is not so great
between them. Perhaps if we were talking only about that literature, the producer makes radical
experiments with form, for example, say, well, some of the literature of Samuel Beckett, the work of
B. S. Johnson, or figures like Eva Figus or Christine Brooke Rose or that sort of thing.
There, that's probably about as far away from popular fiction as you could get.
Same in cinema. If you were looking at a very experimental film, what, of Stan Brackage or
Bill Viola or something like that and you were to compare that with Jurassic Park, then
there's a big chasm. But if you'd compare, say, the very intelligent films but made for a mainstream
audience like, say, those of Martin Scorsese with some of the more populous inclined things of George
Lucas and Steven Spielberg, I don't think there's anything like the same sort of total
difference of intent and means and everything there. But that's, it's very hard for me to think
of a composer who's equivalent to someone like Scorsese in cinema. And that's in no sense to call
Scorsese a middle brow filmmaker. I think he's a very, very great filmmaker throughout his career.
But he has worked within basically narrative oriented structures. He's done very imaginative
things with all aspects of the cinema, all aspects of how you use cuts, how you use edits of other
types, how you use the camera work, everything like that, how you use music actually, everything
like that. But in ways that are meaningful to a mainstream audience.
I think you'd have to look in the popular music sphere to find an equivalent figure. I don't
think you'd find it in the composition world. Yeah. So maybe in the jazz sphere, something like
Coltrane's A Love Supreme might be comparable in a way that something like Cecil Taylor's
unit structures wouldn't, I think. If that makes sense. So I think
the competition from popular culture is of a different order of magnitude. I mean, also just
simply the global reach of it. I mean, does that much popular fiction other than perhaps
J.K. Rowling and a few others, when she was more in vogue than she is now,
how much popular fiction gets a truly, maybe 10 round as well, gets a truly global audience,
like you could say of a quite a significant amount of popular music as well, probably even less so
with theatre as well. So and, you know, a thing I noticed in academia, you can, when you talk about
cultured people, again, I come across people who know huge amounts about literature, huge amounts
about society and politics, lots about the visual arts, but you mentioned something like a D major
scale to them. And they really think this is, you know, you might as well be talking about
sort of advanced astrophysics. Right, right. But I don't think that would have been the case.
And this was my third point. I don't think that would have been the case 30 or 40 years
ago. I think a lot of educated people would have had some exposure to at least some basics of music
theory and some basics of a Western classical musical tradition. And that's, that is disappearing,
I think. It's particularly bad here in Britain and particularly bad in the US. But from all I can
tell, it's sort of being marginalised out in lots of other countries as well, perhaps at a slightly
different rate. And one of the consequences of this is that I'm, well, I think, I still think
even some of the most radical work in new music, in some sense, has meaning relative to a tradition,
including some of that stuff like Helmut Lachemann on where it's your cargo, and the sense is
turning that tradition on its head. But you need to know what that tradition is to recognise it
being turned on its head. The, I've heard from regularly, perhaps a bit too often from young
composers, they think that the classical tradition is dead, or they want it to be dead, perhaps.
I mean, in some universities, I think they don't want to have their own music to compete with that
for student interest and favour. But some of some contemporary composers have played an active
role in trying to sort of push that Western classical tradition out of the curriculum,
in a way that I think is often very destructive.
What do you think is their motivation for doing that?
Well, as I say, on one hand, I think they want to have the ground to themselves for a certain sort of
art music, if you like. And if they're just one composer amongst the great many spanning
centuries, and they're a much smaller fish, and a much bigger pond.
Do you think there are contemporary authors who are anxious about having their work
compete with Shakespeare?
Not to the same extent.
Because composers routinely, I know this because I have, I work with so many students,
they imagine themselves as being potentially in the same room as Beethoven, and they're not
measuring up. But I don't see a lot of poets thinking now, hang on a minute, this is not as
good as the Shakespearean sonnets.
Well, because I think there is an audience for contemporary literature, I say, not the most
radical experimental stuff I was mentioning, but a lot of artistic literature, if you like,
which is not in its own right, which doesn't necessarily, those who read it don't necessarily
have the same amount invested in at least sort of classics from before the 19th century.
That's possible, I think the same is true in theatre as well, and possibly in the visual
arts, so it's a bit more complex. I've not yet seen evidence that the same is true for new music.
There's a few people, there's a few people who might like some progressive rock and some zapper
or something, and then come from that into Stockhouse, and yes, I've known that happened,
but I think that's quite exceptional. There isn't the same,
constituency has say many who might read a novel of Martin Amos or something, or
Michel Huelbeck, but wouldn't necessarily be that drawn to reading Daniel Defoe or reading
Samantha's. I don't think that's there, or I haven't seen it in music, and so when I'm saying
about those in universities who are pushing the sort of, take the dead white European males off
the curriculum, and there are plenty of these, I think they're ultimately to some extent digging
their own grave here, because if they- Well, the second part of that means get rid of the
dead white males in order to make room for me. Yes, exactly, and sometimes it's just living
white males. The only way they differ is they're not dead, but unfortunately we all will be in
the end. Which posits that there's a zero-sum game effectively. Yes, there is.
But if, I mean, I really wish some contemporary poets would think more about this, if you didn't have
some sort of weight of tradition, which in some sense informs and gives somewhere to locate your
work, if you're actually just having to compete on its own terms with popular music,
do you think it was your standard chance? I hear lots of stuff about saying, oh,
we have different modes of distribution, now anyone can produce things on a laptop, and you
can produce a lot with a laptop, especially now with some of the latest AI software for
composition, which I've looked at and has other sorts of new implications. There is a lot you
can do in that respect, but how do you get anyone to listen to it? Anyone can do something,
put it out on SoundCloud, or Spotify, or something like that. But that's just as true of popular
genres as it is. Oh yes, sure. It's not as though it's any easier to emerge from nothing
and make a gigantic career for yourself as a singer-songwriter. Oh, I know, and all
I hear is this is getting harder and harder in the popular field to make any sort of impact
when there are so many other people trying to do it, and there might be all sorts of factors
with the small number who come from this and actually gain some sort of wider recognition,
which is why it's a huge mistake. And it's disingenuous when you get things like Degreak
or Supromasis to think, if you study popular music, that this will give you a route towards a great
well-paying career. For everyone you see, every population you see who is doing that,
there are any number of others who've done a handful of gigs and small venues and then
just sort of split up. Nevertheless, my intuitive sense, having been in the new music world,
I'm not really sure if I'm in it anymore, but perhaps I am, it's hard to say, is that
that there's something either fundamentally broken or exhausted about that culture today.
I don't know which. I don't know if it's repairable. I don't know if it ought to be repaired,
but the sense I get attending concerts, and this could partly be a reflection of
my being a little bit older now. So, of course, it feels different to attend a concert when you're
42, as I am now, as opposed to when you're 22. The excitement level is perhaps not the same,
because you've seen several hundred concerts in the intervening years. But it certainly seems to
me, as though something has changed, there's much less of a sense of anticipation or excitement
surrounding these events. There's a sense that the infrastructures that are supporting these sorts
of events is on very shaky ground, I would say, that it may not be able to convincingly justify
its own indefinite existence without some kind of massive change in the way that it's set up,
and that we cannot indefinitely push off into the future the question of, well, who's listening to
it? Well, future audiences, well, that doesn't work forever.
No, it doesn't work forever. And then I'll just finish this with one more point. So, there are
pieces that I've heard that involve enormous orchestras playing extraordinarily esoteric
techniques that require a great deal of specialized training that is not something you can count on
with the vast majority of professional orchestras. You need a specialized new music orchestra to do
that. Specialized new music orchestras are, of course, financially non-viable, unless they're
being massively subsidized by the state. These works require enormously expensive rehearsals to
produce, and they're typically played once. And this is not by any means an isolated phenomenon.
It is, in fact, the standard mode of operating for most of the continental festivals. And the
assumption seems to be that it's better to program only premieres or buy-in-large premieres,
let's say 90% of the works will be premieres. And it seems to be almost a structural phenomenon
that, of course, these works won't be played again, or maybe they'll be dug up in 25 years
and dusted off. But in the vast majority of cases, works that cost hundreds of thousands
of euros to put on, there's no way that you can play them with anything like the frequency that
would be required for them to become either familiar or to make any kind of an impression
beyond the local audience of maybe a few hundred people that hears the premiere. So that, I think,
I think that's got to stop, or it simply will stop out of its own inertia and out of the
sheer financial absurdity of it. So if you were to compare something like that, a composition that
takes two years to write, that requires a colossal budget in order to perform, and that can only
be done once, that sounds to me like a non-starter. Compare that to a figure such as Vivian Meyer
in the photography world. There we go. Vivian Meyer was a photographer who operated essentially
in secret. She was a street photographer in Chicago who, for decades, took square format images
with a rolloflex camera on the streets of Chicago, produced something like 25,000 photographs,
just one of the finest street photographers of all time, never showed her work to anybody,
never told anyone she was doing it. And when she died, all of these boxes of negatives were
discovered by a film historian, and she became posthumously a phenomenon. But this work is done
privately at no cost to anybody except the cost of a film for her, and ends up having a very
significant popular impact when it's eventually discovered. So there's a colossal asymmetry
between the means required to produce these things versus the number of people that will
actually benefit from that. Well, I think we do have to distinguish between the performing and
non-performing arts in this respect. I mean, photography can essentially be done by a single
person. I recognize sometimes you have other people doing prints and the negatives and so on,
but you don't require the whole apparatus of a group of performers to produce photography. It's
the same story for literature as well. Whereas music or film or theater or dance are multi-person
activities, and that's always going to be more expensive. And this is one reason why I say
what some people say about, well, why can't the modern music world be like the modern art world,
particularly in terms of the amounts of money that are made by some of the artists. But they
produce a particular thing that becomes a commodity. But here's the thing. In the popular sphere,
the amount of money that it costs to produce the thing is scaled in terms of the number of people
that it can potentially reach. There's a coherence between those two things. So if you make a film
that has a £100 million budget, for example, then you're expecting to get a return on that.
You're expecting that it will draw at least £100 million in the box office. So you could argue,
well, there's no reason why that should apply to the fine arts. But somebody does have to pay for
it. There's no way to get around that fact. This is what I've been banging on about for years,
a bit like a broken record, that I think the possible decline of a subsidy culture for new
music is one of the biggest threats it could possibly face. There is no way that the vast
majority of new music, other than things like rice and glass and a few others,
could survive just on the open marketplace. The costs are too great and the returns too low.
The listenership is too low, except for the odd few things that may... I mean, it's possible
some orchestra could put a big bird whistle piece on within, in the context of an otherwise
more traditional program, and they'd still get enough people in that that would just about cover
the costs of it. But those cases... Well, and yes, with things like chamber music as well and solo
performance where the costs aren't quite so great, it's also possible. But on the whole,
the vast majority of new music, as we understand it, at least in European terms,
only gets to be performed, only gets to be recorded through support, through state subsidies. So,
money collected through taxation and redistributed to make up for the shortfall, or through the
radio stations, or other broadcasters who collect it through the license fee, or to some extent
through the universities as well. Now, I mean, certainly in Britain, we've seen sweeping cuts
to arts funding, especially to music funding recently, the most prominent of which,
Relitia English National Opera, which at the time we're talking, the idea is it could be relocated
in Manchester, but it almost certainly won't be the same sort of entity that it was before.
Big grant losses to things like the Britain symphony, to the London symphony, to the
ensemble saffron in Manchester who have had to close down, and so on and so forth. And in economically
difficult times, these things are seen as perhaps not the most pressing social needs, and some of
the easiest things to cut when cuts are made. Now, many have said to me, why are you always so
concerned? Why are you always talking about subsidy? And they don't want to talk about it. They don't
think it's a very interesting issue or something. I say, well, you think it's all fine, doesn't
need thinking about while it's there. But the moment, I say, the moment people start saying,
well, maybe we don't need to spend this money on these ensembles, on these festivals,
what will be the arguments you will use to try and oppose those cuts?
Well, the problem is, that's exactly it. I don't think there necessarily are convincing
arguments, at least not to the people that would be in charge of dispensing the funds.
So for instance, you may have seen there's a rather well-known video on YouTube of Boulez
on a talk show with, I think it's Michel Schneider, who is a French minister of the time,
who gets rather combative with Boulez. And they're talking about Irkheim. And he says, well,
Irkheim is costing, I don't remember the figure, it was a colossal amount of money. It's costing
a significant percentage of the budget, the annual budget for music from the Ministry of Culture.
And the minister was basically asking Boulez, how can you possibly justify the expense of an
institution like this, given the extremely small amount of productions that it's actually producing
in terms of public concerts, in terms of anything that anybody in the general public could possibly
either understand or could attend. And of course, Boulez gets very angry and defensive and calls
the minister a fraud. But he basically sidesteps the question. He's very defensive, very angry,
but he doesn't acknowledge that there may be somewhere in there a totally legitimate question,
given that it is public money, it is coming out of the taxpayer's pocket.
So what is the justification for such a colossal expense,
given that the vast majority of the population is never going to either attend a concert or
benefit in any tangible way from that institution? Well, I think it is possible to make some sorts
of arguments there. But just to compare an even more mainstream example than your Boulez interview
one, in the 1990s, there was a series here called The House about the Royal Opera House.
It was a documentary crew who followed them over an extended period. And it's widely credited with
doing no particular good to the Royal Opera House's reputation, because in this so
elevated art form, of course, you saw lots of very petty people going about their jobs,
as you would in any institution of that size. But it sort of rather deflated a lot of its own
mythology there. But there was one episode which began with the general manager, Jeremy Isaacs,
traveling to work in a taxi. And I mean, it was clearly a bit set up, but you had the taxi driver
asking some of the things that taxi drivers in London do. He says, oh, you're Jeremy Isaacs,
aren't you? He says, yes, I am. Clearly a bit grumpy and not particularly wanted to talk to this
taxi driver. He said, OK, can you just ask me something? And the taxi driver was framed as
a quite reasonable way, saying, well, why should all of people like me and other taxpayers who
never go to the opera, why should our taxes go into this? And he just gave a very grumpy and
very defensive response. And he says, well, if you're not happy, I suggest you take it up with
your MP. And he says, we get the lowest subsidy in Europe, which is true. But he wasn't prepared
to engage the question. And unfortunately, I think that's quite common that people don't want to
ask this question. Now, you could, I think, articulate an argument in terms of the advancement
of musical knowledge and musical language, which could be seen as a good in its own right, even
if only minority actually partake of that. But it could be seen to have other sort of
side effects and other byproducts. Well, I think if you don't engage the question thoroughly,
then the danger is that it will simply seem like a form of entitlement.
Which it is. It is. And do you think the people who are chasing after the commissions on all the
big festivals in Europe, do you think that many of them have a sense of some sort of wider social
responsibility? Or do you think they're thinking, what do I have to do to get the most lucrative
commissions? And many think, well, I am a great composer, or at least I say so. So therefore,
I should get these commissions. And of course, there's more people wanting them than there are
commissions to go around. And for one way reason or another, some get the commissions, some don't.
I'm not saying that's always a fair process. There's lots of factors involved, but then some get very
embittered because they feel entitled to have these things. But you can sometimes frame their
entitlement in terms that would make sense to other people in new music, the value of their
work. But framing them in terms that would make sense to a wider public is quite a bit harder to do.
And as subsidy is gradually being cut, and as what we might call an avant-garde establishment,
its position is looking more and more precarious now, including in the light of new diversity
initiatives, and so on. As that's happening, what you are starting to see is what I think rather
desperate attempts to sort of suggest some social relevance, which is where you get a lot of music,
which is distinguish more by which topical issues it fastens itself on to, as if away saying, please
look, I'm writing a piece about the war in Ukraine, so therefore it's relevant and it's meaningful.
To which, as I was saying to you before, I would ask, well, why is that a piece of music?
And if you're writing a sort of, yes, a slow laminato so for string orchestra,
saying to the dead in Ukraine, I'm sorry, forget it, I've heard 100 pieces of those,
and you could take them from one traumatic event to another without having to change
almost anything. I mean, not so many people do that in the new music scene, but they're trying
to fame discourse around their work in terms of anything other than its musical qualities.
And musical abstraction and music's lack of an object, music's not being a figurative art
primarily, of course I recognise as sort of mimetic music and programmatic music and so on,
but I don't think music is fundamentally a mimetic art and that those things, which I think are
strengths are seen as weaknesses. And I think this is just emblematic of a new music scene
that's forced onto the defensive to some extent. The sense of entitlement is not being
mirrored in wider public discourse, which now lacks prominent and articulate figures such as
Boulez, such as Stoccas, perhaps such as Carter, but those types of composers, they're all either
very old or no longer with us now. It was politically expedient in France and Germany and
other places in the post-war era to support contemporary forms of culture for various reasons.
It's no longer the case. In fact, it's a liability to the extent that the general
population even thinks about these things, which I think is highly unlikely, but it's no longer
it's no longer advantageous to say, well, look what we're doing for the arts, look what we're
doing for contemporary music. So there's no reason to imagine that it would continue indefinitely.
And my argument is that this, and to make things clear, I'm not for a minute suggesting that
everything needs to be left up to market forces. Obviously, there are certain things that cannot
be left up to the market. And I'm in favor of state support for cultural institutions,
for museums, for symphony orchestras, for operas, and so on. Where it gets complicated, I think,
is subsidies to individual artists and how those get decided, how they get distributed.
That's very tricky. And my sense now is that a better model is some kind of private funding
or crowdfunding for a lot of projects. And I think that that can actually work quite well.
And part of the reason for that is there's, in those instances, a direct connection between
the person commissioning or the group of people commissioning, there's a relationship between
them and the artist. We open to all sorts of potentials that are corruptibility,
all sorts of favoritism. It could be some rich people give their private money to other people
from their own sort of milieu, their own background, and things like that. It could work
very much against those who are not born to the backgrounds where they're going to have those
sorts of contacts and things. Moving towards private funding, I wouldn't really see as the way
forward, to be honest. Crowdfunding as well, that's, I mean, I don't know how sustainable
that is. I mean, you can do odd projects, but whether someone could sustain enough to sort of
keep working, I'm less sure. The alternative that's left, then, is making an absolutely
airtight case for continued public subsidizing of esoteric art forms.
Yes. And I think that can be done, but maybe the artistic priorities would have to change
a bit. Maybe a bit more honesty would be needed about the traditions in which these are located.
I mean, why should we not be equally giving money towards supporting things that are doing
esoteric things in popular music idioms and traditions? Why would they be any less deserving
of it? There were quite a lot of extremely violent polemics around that in France,
actually, or surrounding the Villa Medici, notably. When they decided to open that institution up to
people working in popular domains, singer-songwriters, for example, and the composers, of course,
predictably, the older, more established composers were absolutely outraged at the idea that
you're taking away a spot from us. We need this. We don't have anything else, and you're giving it
to somebody in the popular field. Unless I know people don't need it. They don't need it.
If they're doing commercial singer-songwriting, of which there's a long tradition of at least
some people making a perfectly viable commercial income from that, then I would say they're right
to say they don't need it. If they were doing something that somehow engages with stylistic
aspects of it or other aspects of those traditions, but are taking it into some new realms, then that
might be a different matter. I suppose I do see value in art being able to experiment in art,
and not just keep doing new experiments from the bottom up, but starting developing new
idioms and developing them over a period of time. Where's there some continuity across an output?
I think there is something to be said for supporting that over an extended period.
And I'll come back to that in terms of what you're saying about premiers in a second.
Because, well, I would frame it in terms of that I think a society which doesn't
offer a space for those things to be developed and articulated
is one that's somewhat impoverished in terms of knowledge, in terms of the forms of experience,
the forms of thought that are made possible, even if they are for a minority. But most people,
I believe, have some sort of minority interest. They're just not all the same, or they wouldn't
be a minority. I've used this sort of analogy with television. Supposing you have
100 people and 101 television channels, and suppose each of those channels
is only watched by one of those people, except for the 101st, which everyone watches.
As well. Do you think any of those people would be happy if you got rid of the 100 and you were
left with only number 101? There is something to be said for supporting minority interests.
The problem is, new music seems to sport only one type of quite narrow minority interest, and
probably some different form of subsidy would have to be spread across a wider range of things,
where you can produce evidence that across the board, there's a range of engagement with all
sorts of people at different parts of society. We're a long way from that at the moment.
Some places more than others. The Huddersfield Festival, for example, is quite open to a very
broad range of styles and practices. A similar thing happened with-
Yes, but what about the audiences? I know they do have a local audience at Huddersfield,
and that matters, and that's been a very important factor in sustaining that festival.
A local audience, which isn't just visionaries, but just from a local community that have taken
an interest in it. But still, for all the variety of styles and practices that there are on show at
Huddersfield, what percentage of the British population, or even the population of parts
of Yorkshire, ever listen to any of them? If they had a range of things, lots of different
communities within that geographical area listen to it. It might be a bit different.
If that is the case already, I'd like to see the evidence for it.
But I just wondered if I could come back to your question about
premiers, because I think that's very important. I'm often bemoaned.
The way that the premier culture permeates so many of the institutions and the events,
and it's almost invariably seen as a better thing to commission new works or play new
works that are doing the circuit, than it is to go back to some other works, which might have happened.
Something, I think, very highly of James Dylan's cycle nine rivers. It was all pretty much
completed, except for a few details by the early noughties. It's had a few performances,
but not that many. I think that's an amazing cycle and would really reward more sustained
exposure. But most people would sooner commission a new work from Dylan if they're at a festival.
And of course, that has to be, if we didn't have the festivals commissioning things,
then a lot of the new things wouldn't get written and everything was new at some point in time.
But I think it's too extreme in terms of, yes, a fetishization of brand new. Something that's
10 years ago can be, certainly as far as the vast majority of any population's concern,
will be just as much new music as something written now. And maybe if we had fewer premiers,
which would actually save some money if you didn't have the same amount of commission fees to pay.
And a bit more revival of things, and a bit more giving things repeated listening,
which they definitely need. And also developing a performance tradition more for those things as
well. Since I've been in Britain on this trip, I've had the opportunity to meet with quite a
few artistic directors of various ensembles and festivals and organizations. And one of the things
that's emerged out of that is a lot of these people are very conscious of the need for that.
And in fact, increasingly inclined to, when contemplating a commission project,
they'll want to set it up in such a manner that the piece can be played four or five or six times,
or potentially be taken on tour. And they're increasingly moving away from this very, what
I think is a very old fashioned and ineffective model of doing a premiere and then moving on to
the next one. I think that's absurd. And I think that there's a lot of people that are recognizing
that. And for composers, I would say, don't be shy or hesitant about arguing in favor of that
when you decide what projects you're going to take on. If the group wants to commission a piece from
you and has no plans to ever do it again beyond the premiere, then perhaps you may wish to hesitate
before accepting that project.
Well, two thoughts there. I mean, absolutely. The move towards networks, I mean, where the
model is, so a new work will get played in arse musical, it'll get played in Veen Moden,
it'll get played in Huddersfield, it'll get played in Musica Strasburg, and so on. And
there are many projects to ensure that commissions don't lead to just one performance,
but a whole range of them. But it's usually a whole range in quite quick succession after
each other, usually in one season, at least, so no more than a year. I don't know of networks
that will have things so that they'll be played once and then played five years later and then
10 years later, and so on. And I know the objections that there are to some of these
networks, that it turns the festival circuit into more of a monolith and more homogenous in
its own way. If basically all the big festivals are just doing the big names and the new works of
those, that becomes less of a place for more distinct festivals as more of their own sort of
distinctive nature and character. So I suppose that's, I don't know why you couldn't have a
festival with its own distinctive character, but still isn't just focused on premiers.
So there's that factor for start, but there's also the question, are people writing music
that will last? Or are they even wanting it to last?
Let me think in the realms of, I mean, we're still talking with our point of reference being the
work. And in something like free improvisation, that really wouldn't be the case in the same
way. I mean, yes, there are works of free improvisation, and there are some that are
perhaps not quite so free or so improvised as suggested to be when they're done on repeated
occasions and there's quite a lot of commonality between them. But the event perhaps counts for more
than the work and its permanency in that sort of genre.
Now, to be fair, not all artists are necessarily preoccupied with posterity.
And it's a completely legitimate standpoint, I think to say. I'm making things for today,
and if it lasts and if it doesn't, that's fine. But I'm interested in doing what I
want to do that reflects the current moment and fate will decide. And it's fine.
Absolutely fair enough. No one, including the cabozas, can know for sure what will and won't
last. And trying self-consciously to write things for posterity brings his own set of problems.
You can see that. So I suppose I wasn't so much thinking of cabozas writing saying,
well, I'll do the best I can and then let history take its course as far as how it's seen. I was
thinking rather more of people writing more ephemeral and topical and off-the-moment things.
And this is where, yes, I'm looking at free improvisation. I'm looking at certain sorts
of community projects involving amateurs, very in vogue at the moment and so on. And lots of things
that might be more interesting for the participants and for the listeners.
And I do think that if I'm really honest, particularly with things involving amateurs,
it's a bit of a taboo, but I've reached taboo a bit. I'm not so convinced about an awful lot
of work with amateurs. And I don't really like the role that amateurism has in British musical
culture overall. I don't think anyone would find it so problematic if I suggested that
amateur dramatics are mostly for friends and family to see maybe a couple of others.
Maybe amateur music making is the same.
Yes, it depends on the level of accomplishment of the amateur, of course. Because in Germany,
there's of course a very strong tradition of, well, in fact, I know many people
in Strasbourg, for example, who are professionals in other fields. They might be
they might be diplomats, they might be working for the Council of Europe, they might be
who have a degree in music, who are passionate about music, but are simply not pursuing it as
a career, but who are outstanding performers. Absolutely. The New London Chamber Choir here,
again, not a professional choir, but one of the most outstanding,
the Disc of Synaxus' Choral Works is one of the greatest synaxus discs I think there's ever been.
And yes, some of the amateur choirs there are more widely, not specific to new music.
There is some fair degree of accomplishment there. But, well, in Britain, I think this means
that people think rare, therefore, we don't really need many professional choirs. And that's the
problem I have there. But I'm thinking more of these community projects with amateurs.
They may form some useful community social function, but I'm not sure they necessarily
produce really remarkable art. I mean, I've seen some exceptions. Some of the work that people
like Gerhard Stabler and Konzu Shim have done with amateurs or schoolchildren has been absolutely
remarkable, I think, really gripping stuff. But it's very directed. I mean, both of them know
exactly what they want from these people and can get it. But I'm not really sure how much input
beyond sort of doing what they're told the amateurs and others have in that.
So what I'm saying is if we're looking for something where you'll have more sustained
traditions and where we will have repeated performances, there needs to be work which
will stand up to that. That's quite right. That is quite right. Yes. Yes, you would have to be,
you would have to be aiming to produce work that can withstand that kind of scrutiny,
that kind of repeated listening. Yeah. Well, we should probably wrap this up. Before we stop,
though, is there anything you'd like to tell our listeners about what you're working on currently
and what you're doing at the moment? Well, things have taken a certain new direction in my
professional life that I've moved from my university, City University of London,
I've moved from the music department to the sociology department. I'm now professor of music,
culture and society here. And there are a lot of continuities in terms of the type of teaching
I do. I mean, I've taught about music and some aspects of wider culture in social context
for a long time. And if anything, I probably find there's a more hospitable culture in the
new department I'm in towards what I'll say is a dialectical view of the relationship between
what I call culture with a medium-sized C, which means not just high culture,
can be popular culture as well, but it means things specifically designated as culture.
It doesn't just mean the whole realm of human activity, which is the more anthropological
definition. But when I say dialectical model, I mean, between that type of culture and the
rest of society, there are all sorts of interplays, interactions, but it's not a simple deterministic
relationship. You can't say because of society's particular way, it'll therefore automatically
produce this type of culture. The culture isn't just a bright part of society. The culture is
equally part of society and can exist in a critical relationship with the rest of society.
Now, that's widely accepted amongst a lot of cultural sociologists, perhaps not so much
amongst some music sociologists and music anthropologists and so on. So it's actually
refreshing to find a much more open intellectual culture with respect to that and lots of other
things in here. So I teach more widely about culture, not just about music, and I teach
about classical social theory, but I will be teaching more about music as a social phenomenon
as well. Beyond that, I'm still playing. I've been playing perhaps more traditional repertoire
in the last few years. In 2022, I did this big cycle of all nine of Liszt's versions of
Beethoven's symphony, and I followed it up with doing this version of the Symphony Fantastique
last year of Berlioz as well. And, you know, I'm looking for new and interesting ways of
combining the old and the new, which is something I've done for a long time, but
it's more fundamental to me now. So I'm doing that. I'm doing lots of writing. I'm writing a new
biography of Stockhausen for reaction books. I'm working on other books on musical modernism
in Germany after 45 and on the history of specialist music schools in Britain
and a whole range of articles. And I've been writing more for non-academic outlets. I've done
oh, since, since 2022, I've published only 11 articles in the Times Higher Education
Journal on lots of things to do with education, including to do with music, but not just that.
I've written more stuff for the London Review books for the critic, and you're trying to,
again, not always on music, but very much on cultural issues and cultural and political
issues. And those things are very important to me. And the opportunity to engage with wider
audiences, also at public events where I've given talks and things is really important. And
it's made me realise the value of that for, for academics. I think there is certainly value
in academics working on something without necessarily knowing where it's going to lead,
just like we're talking about with musicians. And much knowledge has been generated without
necessarily clear endpoints at the beginning. And that's a whole nature of research. You don't
necessarily know what your research will tell you in the end. But that has to come to some point at
which there is a culture of thought of intellectual activity that if they must, if, if they've never
had any discernible, even indirect impact outside of small circles, then their, their value, surely
it's fair to question that. And I've, I've thought about this in the context of academic
writing on culture, including the realms of cultural studies and so on, which I think is
distinct from cultural sociology. You can produce any number of journal articles which will get
hardly read, which have very, very jargon ridden particular takes on cultural phenomena as on.
Now, I don't expect journal, academic journal articles to be read by a wide readership. They're
not done for their purpose. But I might expect that some of their core arguments might be distilled
and find their way into writings for, for a wider audience. And that's to something that what I'm
trying to do is from my wider writing and things. And that there are academics who are very hostile
to that. They, they don't ever want to sort of be asked any questions about what the wider impact or
relevance of their work is. And I think that's unsustainable in the long run. And, you know,
just like we're talking about possible crises and lack of faith in the realm of new music,
the same sort of things are happening in universities and certainly in Britain and
in some other countries, but I think particularly in Britain, now that we have about half the
population graduating from high school going into university, it's forced questions about
what university is for. And you can't just answer them in the same way as you did when
only 20% of the population. It was like, it was something like that or not much more when I was
a student. And you, the whole model of the relationship between research and teaching
has to be looked at again, and the whole model of what, which disciplines matter
inevitably does. And this has been happening, but it's made life difficult for those working in
what seem like very esoteric disciplines when they're no longer succeeding and generating
the same interest from young people are studying those things. And you do ultimately need students
for universities. They're not, they may be primarily research things, but they can't be only
research things on at least a whole sector can't be sustained that way. And how we can maintain
aspects of real sort of critical knowledge generation whilst also teaching things that
young people will find engaging and important. And we can somehow demonstrate to the wider society,
which we expect to fund our activities, how, how what we do has some other meaning. I think
those things can't be ignored and need to be ends as difficult times coming ahead. The British
university sector has been had a situation where fees were frozen in 2017 at 9,250 per year for,
for home undergraduate students. So in real terms, this means that the amount of money that each
institution has coming in is going down every year whilst whilst it's frozen that they can't
go up with inflation. At the same time, Brexit spent a real reduction of EU students,
new visa laws are making it harder for other foreign students to come. And certain subjects,
including music, are finding cuts in secondary provision here. So there isn't the same demand
generated amongst potential students. So we've just recently seen that the music department
in Oxford Brooks was scheduled to be closed down together with some other departments,
like including the Department of Mass there. And there were going to be cuts in other
developed particularly arts and humanities. Unfortunately, I foresee in the next five or
10 years, because other factors are going to make the financial provision even more precarious in
universities, we may see other cuts and we need to be adaptable and flexible and be prepared to
sort of countenance new ideas of what the university is for whilst holding on to what's best here. And
that's very much what I'm engaged with in what I'm writing about those subjects,
just like with music. Ian Pace, thank you very much. Always a pleasure to talk with you.
Likewise, thank you.